[WIP] Resolve #354 (#1)
cjpatton/draft-ietf-tls-esni: draft-ietf-tls-esni.md

the contents of unencrypted handshake messages.

Beyond these primary security and privacy goals, ECH also aims to hide, to some
extent, the fact that it is being used at all. Specifically, the GREASE ECH
extension described in {{grease-ech}} does not change the security properties of

> the TLS handshake at all. Instead, its goal is merely to provide "cover" for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the TLS handshake at all. Its goal is to provide "cover" for the
```

### Do Not Stick Out {#dont-stick-out}

As a means of reducing the impact of network ossification, {{?RFC8744}}
recommends SNI-protection mechanisms be designed in such a way that network
operators do not handle connections in which the mechanism is used differently

> than other connections. To that end, ECH is designed to resemble a standard TLS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operators do not differentiate connections using the mechanism from connections
not using the mechanism. To that end, ECH is designed to resemble a standard TLS
```

handshake as much as possible. The most obvious difference is the extension
itself: as long as middleboxes ignore it, as required by {{!RFC8446}}, the rest
of the handshake is designed to look very much as usual. Still, non-compliance
with established standards is a widespread issue, and it may hinder successful

> deployment of ECH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the handshake is designed to look very much as usual. 
```

Reviewer: (Redundant text, I think.)

The GREASE ECH protocol described in {{grease-ech}} provides a low-risk way to

> evaluate the deployability of ECH on the Internet. It is designed to mimic the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
evaluate the deployability of ECH. It is designed to mimic the
```

(Other networks may be affected similarly, so let's not single out the general Internet.)

real ECH protocol ({{real-ech}}), but without actually changing the security

> properties of the handshake. The underlying theory is that if GREASE ECH is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
real ECH protocol ({{real-ech}}) without changing the security properties of the 
handshake. The underlying theory is that if GREASE ECH is
```

> deployable without triggering differentiable behavior, and real ECH looks enough
> like GREASE ECH, then ECH should be deployable as well. Thus, our strategy for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deployable without triggering differentiable behavior, and real ECH is indifferentiable from GREASE ECH, 
then ECH should be deployable as well. Thus, our strategy for
```

mitigating network ossification has two parts:
1. Design a "cover" protocol (i.e., GREASE ECH) that meets some notion of
   deployability.
1. Design the "target" protocol (i.e., ECH) so that networks do not differentiate
   between it and the cover protocol.

This strategy is analogous to the methodology that lead to "Middlebox
Compatibility Mode" for TLS 1.3 described in {{!RFC8446}}.

In the first step, the deployability of GREASE ECH is established by deploying
the protocol and measuring its impact. [[OPEN ISSUE: Run an experiment that
compares the error rate of GREASE ECH connections with vanilla TLS 1.3.]]

> Viewing the network operator as the adversary for the moment, we model the
> requirements of the second step in terms of the strength of the adversary, as
> follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

(This text seems unnecessaary)

> Suppose we know some set of features of the TLS handshake that are known to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on this experiment, suppose we learn the set of features of the TLS handshake that are known to
```

trigger differentiable treatment by the network. This set might include the
plaintext extensions offered by the client or server, plaintext alert messages,
the number of round trips over the network, the length of each message, and so

> on. Let us call these the protocol's "observable features". Our goal is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on. Let these be called the protocol's "observable features". A goal of this specification is to
```

design real ECH so that each execution of the protocol has the same observable
features as if GREASE ECH were being executed instead. For example, if
extensions are an observable feature, then regardless of whether they are
running the target protocol or the cover protocol, the client and server should
appear to negotiate the same set of extensions. That way the real protocol does
not trigger differentiable treatment that would not have been triggered by the
cover protocol.

> Informally, we will say that target protocol is "indifferentiable" from cover

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Informally, the target protocol is indifferentiable from the cover
```

Author: Ack (not taken).

Reviewer: My suggestion is to avoid lanaguage like "we say," and rather say, "this specification says." (This isn't a paper after all.)

protocol if, when executed in the presence of the adversary, both protocols have

> the same set of observable features [[TODO: Decide whether to reference
> @cjpatton's paper on protocol indifferentiability. It doesn't envision this
> particular application, but the formal model definitely applies.]] The strength

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same set of observable features. The strength
```

I don't think that paper is immediately applicable in this context.

Author: It is, but I'll drop this TODO.

of this model depends on how rich the set of observable features is: it may
include the transcript of the protocol's execution itself, yielding a very
strong attacker; or it may be as coarse grained as the number of IP packets
sent. The model's strength also depends on whether the attacker is passive or

> active (see {{goals}}); middleboxes have been known to exhibit active behavior,
> even without malicious intent [[TOOD: Add references]].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
active (see {{goals}}).
```

Did you have a specific capability in mind here? I can't think of anything at the moment, so I'd recommend just dropping this bit.

Author: Retransmission in the context of QUIC.

Reviewer: Middleboxes don't do that specifically for QUIC, as far as I know.

> Ensuring indifferentiability of ECH from GREASE ECH in a strong attack model is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indifferentiability of ECH from GREASE ECH in a strong attack model is
```

not feasible for all implementations. Thus, this specification aims to provide a
baseline security level that most deployments can achieve easily, while
providing implementations enough flexibility to achieve stronger security

> wherever possible. Minimally, real ECH is designed to be indifferentiable from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where possible. Minimally, real ECH is designed to be indifferentiable from
```

GREASE ECH for passive adversaries with following capabilities:
1. The attacker does not know the ECHConfigs used by the server.
1. The attacker keeps per-connection state only. In particular, it does not
   track endpoints across connections.
1. Observable features include: the code points of extensions negotiated in the
   clear, but not the payloads themselves; the length of messages; and the
   values of plaintext alert messages.

> This leaves a variety of practical differentiators out-of-scope. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This leaves a variety of practical differentiators out-of-scope, including, though not
necessarily limited to the following:
```

1. the value of the configuration identifier;

> 1. the value of the outer SNI;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. the value of the outer SNI;
1. session resumption via a "pre_shared_key" extension in the outer ClientHello;
```

1. the TLS version negotiated, which may depend on ECH acceptance;
1. client authentication, which may depend on ECH acceptance; and
1. HRR issuance, which may depend on ECH acceptance.

These can be addressed with more sophisticated implementations, but some

> mitigations require coordination between the client and server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mitigations require coordination between the client and server. Such mitigations
are out-of-scope for this specification.
```
